#Next Generation Sequencing Read Simulator

To simulate a NGS Sequencer we need to have a reference genome first. Starting from the reference genome, as we know a sequencer takes input the fragmented DNA copies to read the DNA and the resultant reading is termed as READS. Therefore to mimic the sequencer we randomly pick reads from the reference genome .fa file(fasta file) by computationaly generating random numbers using random library in python to mimic the starting positions of READS.

All Sequencers have certain error in calling the base incorrectly. The error is inevitable as such nothing is 100% efficient in this universe. But the technologists try to minimize the base call error and thus in order to simulate a NGS Read Simulator we need to incorporate the error computationaly into the reads. We do this by randomly picking a base with a specified error rate and flipping that base to other nucleotide. Now, the Simulator is ready, we can check the error rate by aligning the READS (which we calculated computationaly) to the reference genome.

STEPS to perform NGS READ SIMULATOR

Download the reference genome from ENSEMBLE in fasta format.
Subject that fasta file to script.py
script.py will generate Simulated_Reads.fq a FASTQ format file which script.py as output.
One can align the Simulated_Reads.py to Refereance genome using Sequence Alignement Tools like Bowtie and bwa, but here we are using bwa tool
One can check the error rates of the sequencer by extracting information out of sam(.sam) file generated by Sequence alignment tools (here bwa). Such calculation and commands can be found in bwa_alignment_error.txt
NGS Read Simulator is performed and verified.
